references/related_work.md, before:


## Optimizing Random Forest-Based Inference on RISC-V MCUs at the Extreme Edge
2022.
https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1109/TCAD.2022.3199903
Enrico Tabanelli, Giuseppe Tagliavini, Luca Benini


Defines multiple inference strategies for decision trees / forests.
Uses floating point features, 32 bits / 1 word.

- Naive. Code generation of the entire if-else trees. 24 bytes per node
- DT-Loop. Using an array-of-structs. With 16 bytes per node. Leaf nodes are separate.
- DT-Rec. Using an array-of-struct. With 24 bytes per node. Integrated leaf node in decision node, so fewer nodes total.
- DT-Arr. Using separate arrays for: feature index, threshold, children (2x). 16 bytes per node.

Shows pseudo-code for the algorihtm, data structures.
Also shows disassembly of the inner loops.

Ran experiments on PULPissimo.
RISC-V mcu. But does not have data caches.
Tested on two datasets, Vehicle and MFeat (handwritten digits).

4.8× speedup, and 45% storage reduction over naive.
Found DT-Rec and DT-Arr to be pareto optimal over DT-Loop and Naive.


## Ultra-compact Binary Neural Networks for Human Activity Recognition on RISC-V Processors
2021.
Francesco Daghero et. al

Compared RF and Binary Neural Network.
On UniMiB-SHAR and a proprietary dataset.
Has an MCU optimized RF implementation, which they compare against.

> The LEAVES array stores the output prediction for all leaf nodes.
> Specifically, our implementation stores class probabilities for all classes in the leaves, rather than a single class label,
> as this yields higher accuracy
> and also matches the scikit-learn implementation, making the conversion of models easier

> To save memory, only the right child is stored,
> whereas the left child is implicitly equal to the following node in the array.

> Thresholds and probabilities are quantized to 8bit integer,
> since RI5CY does not have a FPU.
> indexes in the different arrays also use 8 or 16bit, depending on the maximum RF size,
to minimize the memory footprint.


> For RFs, we varied the number of trees and their maximum depth
> ...
> Interestingly, RF raw outperforms RF features, probably because the simple magnitude features proposed in [22] are not very informative for the model.
> 
> In terms of cycles, RFs clearly outperform BNNs for accuracy values < 60%, requiring around 2.5k cycles even for large models.
> However, we could not find a RF-based solution able to produce higher accuracy, without exceeding the entire 520kB of memory of the target HW.

? Should be possible to reach much higher than 60% with RF on UniMiB-SHAR ?

"Adaptive Random Forests for Energy-Efficient Inference on Microcontrollers" (by same authors)
also tests on UniMiB. Also struggled to get above 60%.

"High-Level Features for Human Activity Recognition and Modeling" reached up to 67.3% accuracy on UniMiB SHAR.


#### New machine learning approaches for real-life human activity recognition using smartphone sensor-based data
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0950705123000102

Daniel Garcia-Gonzalez, et al.
University of A Coruña.
2023.

- comparison of the main machine learning algorithms for HAR.
- A dataset taken in a real-life environment was used, unlike in other studies.
- Experiments were done to get the best model configurations for long-themed activities.

> These experiments proved that, in this case, tree-based models, such as Random Forest, outperform the rest.
> The final result shows an enormous improvement in the accuracy of the best model found to date for this purpose, from 74.39% to 92.97%.

Custom dataset. Published to https://lbd.udc.es/research/real-life-HAR-dataset/
Classes. Inactive, active, walking, driving
Four different sensors: accelerometer, gyroscope, magnetometer and GPS/
Smartphone collection. 19 individuals.
Not fixed orientation or placement of the smartphone,


# Hyperparameter tuning

## Hyperparameters and Tuning Strategies for Random Forest

Looks at 500++ trees.
References many other relevant works.


## Better Trees: An empirical study on hyperparameter tuning of classification decision tree induction algorithms

Does not consider ensembles. Only CART and J48.



# Hardware acceleration

#### ST Machine Learning Core

Built into ST IMUs. Those with part numbers ending in -X.
Decision tree classifier. With feature extraction.
No support for multiple decision trees/ensembles.
https://www.st.com/content/st_com/en/ecosystems/MEMS-Sensors-Ecosystem-for-Machine-Learning.html
https://github.com/STMicroelectronics/STMems_Machine_Learning_Core

#### An Ultra-Low Energy Human Activity Recognition Accelerator for Wearable Health Applications
https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3358175

? how is classificatio done

Commit message:

Compute pareto fronts and model size gains

references/related_work.md, after:


## Optimizing Random Forest-Based Inference on RISC-V MCUs at the Extreme Edge
2022.
https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1109/TCAD.2022.3199903
Enrico Tabanelli, Giuseppe Tagliavini, Luca Benini


Defines multiple inference strategies for decision trees / forests.
Uses floating point features, 32 bits / 1 word.

- Naive. Code generation of the entire if-else trees. 24 bytes per node
- DT-Loop. Using an array-of-structs. With 16 bytes per node. Leaf nodes are separate.
- DT-Rec. Using an array-of-struct. With 24 bytes per node. Integrated leaf node in decision node, so fewer nodes total.
- DT-Arr. Using separate arrays for: feature index, threshold, children (2x). 16 bytes per node.

Shows pseudo-code for the algorihtm, data structures.
Also shows disassembly of the inner loops.

Ran experiments on PULPissimo.
RISC-V mcu. But does not have data caches.
Tested on two datasets, Vehicle and MFeat (handwritten digits).

4.8× speedup, and 45% storage reduction over naive.
Found DT-Rec and DT-Arr to be pareto optimal over DT-Loop and Naive.


## Ultra-compact Binary Neural Networks for Human Activity Recognition on RISC-V Processors
2021.
Francesco Daghero et. al

Compared RF and Binary Neural Network.
On UniMiB-SHAR and a proprietary dataset.
Has an MCU optimized RF implementation, which they compare against.

> The LEAVES array stores the output prediction for all leaf nodes.
> Specifically, our implementation stores class probabilities for all classes in the leaves, rather than a single class label,
> as this yields higher accuracy
> and also matches the scikit-learn implementation, making the conversion of models easier

> To save memory, only the right child is stored,
> whereas the left child is implicitly equal to the following node in the array.

> Thresholds and probabilities are quantized to 8bit integer,
> since RI5CY does not have a FPU.
> indexes in the different arrays also use 8 or 16bit, depending on the maximum RF size,
to minimize the memory footprint.


> For RFs, we varied the number of trees and their maximum depth
> ...
> Interestingly, RF raw outperforms RF features, probably because the simple magnitude features proposed in [22] are not very informative for the model.
> 
> In terms of cycles, RFs clearly outperform BNNs for accuracy values < 60%, requiring around 2.5k cycles even for large models.
> However, we could not find a RF-based solution able to produce higher accuracy, without exceeding the entire 520kB of memory of the target HW.

? Should be possible to reach much higher than 59% with RF on UniMiB-SHAR ?
BNN reached 70% accuracy.
Some of the limitation is due to model size. Which our work would improve on.
How much?
But may also need more powerful feature engineering.

"Adaptive Random Forests for Energy-Efficient Inference on Microcontrollers" (by same authors)
also tests on UniMiB. Also struggled to RF above 60%.

"High-Level Features for Human Activity Recognition and Modeling" reached up to 67.3% accuracy on UniMiB SHAR.


#### New machine learning approaches for real-life human activity recognition using smartphone sensor-based data
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0950705123000102

Daniel Garcia-Gonzalez, et al.
University of A Coruña.
2023.

- comparison of the main machine learning algorithms for HAR.
- A dataset taken in a real-life environment was used, unlike in other studies.
- Experiments were done to get the best model configurations for long-themed activities.

> These experiments proved that, in this case, tree-based models, such as Random Forest, outperform the rest.
> The final result shows an enormous improvement in the accuracy of the best model found to date for this purpose, from 74.39% to 92.97%.

Custom dataset. Published to https://lbd.udc.es/research/real-life-HAR-dataset/
Classes. Inactive, active, walking, driving
Four different sensors: accelerometer, gyroscope, magnetometer and GPS/
Smartphone collection. 19 individuals.
Not fixed orientation or placement of the smartphone,


# Hyperparameter tuning

## Hyperparameters and Tuning Strategies for Random Forest

Looks at 500++ trees.
References many other relevant works.


## Better Trees: An empirical study on hyperparameter tuning of classification decision tree induction algorithms

Does not consider ensembles. Only CART and J48.



# Hardware acceleration

#### ST Machine Learning Core

Built into ST IMUs. Those with part numbers ending in -X.
Decision tree classifier. With feature extraction.
No support for multiple decision trees/ensembles.
https://www.st.com/content/st_com/en/ecosystems/MEMS-Sensors-Ecosystem-for-Machine-Learning.html
https://github.com/STMicroelectronics/STMems_Machine_Learning_Core

#### An Ultra-Low Energy Human Activity Recognition Accelerator for Wearable Health Applications
https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3358175

? how is classificatio done
